There's an ongoing need for volunteers at Bethel and on theocratic construction projects.
Are you interested in serving in these ways?
If so, we encourage you to watch the video,
making yourself available for Bethel's service,
which can be found on JW.org.
In addition, pioneers between the ages of 23 and 65
who are interested in expanding their ministry,
are invited to contact their congregation secretary
and fill in the online application to attend the school for kingdom evangelizers.
How can we maintain our faith during these difficult last days of this system of things?
We learn many lessons from a time remarkably similar to ours.
Please follow along in your Bible as brother Anthony Morris of the governing body,
introduces and applies the dramatic Bible reading entitled,
Noah, faith moved him to obey.
Three days before Jesus was put to death,
his disciples posed a question that has great importance for all of us today.
They asked Jesus,
what will be the sign of your presence and of the conclusion of the system of things?
In reply, Jesus foretolded a time period preceding the promised new world would be marked by events,
such as wars, earthquakes, food shortages, and pestilence.
Jesus then said,
for as they were in those days before the flood,
eating and drinking, men marrying, and women being given a marriage,
until the day that Noah entered into the ark, and they took no note until the flood came
and swept them all away, so the presence of the Son of Man will be.
With those words, Jesus confirmed that Noah was a real person and that the flood was an actual
historical event. He also warned us that the period just before the flood
mirrors the period in which we live today, so it's important to consider closely what happened
in Noah's day and to see what we can learn from it. The opening chapters of the book of Genesis
give us a picture of what life was like in the centuries prior to Noah
after Adam and Eve were expelled from the Garden of Eden. Everyone spoke the same language.
And people had possibly developed the art of writing.
They had built a city, maybe several cities. They had learned how to forge copper and iron.
They made musical instruments, harps and flutes. And because they were much closer to the physical
perfection of Adam and Eve, they lived long lives, hundreds of years.
But, all was not well. People turned away from Jehovah, and as a result, they became very violent
and immoral. Things got so bad that Jehovah moved a righteous man named Enoch, the seventh man,
and the genealogical line from Adam to prophesy that God would not forever tolerate a wicked and
rebellious world. He'd execute judgment against the ungodly. Of course, the ungodly people in
Enoch's day didn't like what he was saying. They hated Enoch, and they may have tried to kill him.
Enoch never saw the fulfillment of this prophecy. Another 600 years passed, and by then,
conditions on earth had become even worse. Let's read Genesis chapter 6, verses 1 through 7.
Now when men started to grow a number on the surface of the ground, and daughters were born to them,
the sons of the true God began to notice that the daughters of men were beautiful.
So they began taking as wives all whom they chose. Then Jehovah said,
My spirit will not tolerate men indefinitely, because he is only flesh. Accordingly, his days will
amount to 120 years. The Nephilim were on the earth in those days and afterward. During that time,
the sons of the true God continued to have relations with the daughters of men, and these
bore sons to them. They were the mighty ones of old times, the men of fame. Consequently,
Jehovah saw that man's wickedness was great on the earth, and that every inclination of the
thoughts of his heart was only bad all the time. Jehovah regretted that he had made men on the earth,
in his heart was saddened. So Jehovah said, I am going to wipe men whom I have created off the
surface of the ground, man together with domestic animals, creeping animals, and flying creatures
of the heavens, where I regret that I have made them. During that time, some angels from heaven
noticed beautiful human women and developed lustful feelings for them. These angels rebelled against
God by coming to earth and taking on human bodies in order to have sex with the women. They became
selfish and wicked demons. They may have been charming, intelligent, handsome, and they had supernatural
powers. They must have been irresistible, especially to women who themselves had no love of God.
Perhaps the angels took some women by force, whatever the case, the angels took all whom they chose.
What human on earth at that time could hope to stop demons? To these godless creatures people
lost their daughters, their sisters, and possibly even their wives. The women became pregnant
and gave birth to sons, but their sons were not like other boys. They were stronger,
they were bullies, aggressive, fierce, and brutal. Those qualities stayed with them as they grew.
The boys became men, but they were unusually cruel. They were called Nephilim,
possibly meaning those who caused others to fall down and people feared them. Like their fathers,
the Nephilim had no love for God, and they cared only about their fame for being strong and vicious.
The materialized angels in their savage offspring dominated the world of that time and people followed
their lead. Jehovah saw that man's wickedness was rampant and that every inclination of the thoughts of
his heart was only bad all the time. How Satan must have delighted to see most humans reject Jehovah,
and become more and more corrupt. And that world of depraved people there was a man who was faithful
to Jehovah. Let's read about him in Genesis chapter 6 and verse 8. But Noah found favor in the eyes
of Jehovah. This is the history of Noah. Noah was a righteous man. He proved himself faultless
among his contemporaries. Noah walked with the true God. In time Noah became father to three
sons, Shem, Ham, and Japheth. But the earth had become ruined in the sight of the true God,
and the earth was filled with violence. Yes, God looked upon the earth and it was ruined.
All flesh had ruined its way on the earth. Some people today say that there was no such person
as Noah, and that the account of the ark and the flood is just a legend or a fairy tale.
But the Bible writer knew that Noah really existed and that the flood truly happened.
The prophet Isaiah and Ezekiel both referred to Noah. Ezra, the writer of first chronicles in
the gospel writer Luke, both include Noah and the chronologies they compiled. The apostles Peter
and Paul both confirmed the Genesis account of the flood. And as we mentioned earlier, the son of God
himself testified that Noah was a real person and that the flood really happened.
Noah's faith was outstanding. He lived in an evil world, a world dominated,
a terrorized angels there, violent offspring, and a society of ungodly people.
Noah lacked many of the things we have today to help us keep our faith strong.
He had no Bible to help him to love Jehovah and to understand his ways. He didn't know about all
the faithful men and women who would live after him. And Noah had no congregation of fellow believers
to encourage him and to strengthen his faith. Yet Noah knew much. He knew what happened in the
Garden of Eden. And he could see the tragic results. He saw that people grew old and died.
He knew that the way to the Garden of Eden was barred and the ground outside had been cursed.
He understood what his great grandfather, Enoch, had foretold.
And Noah knew that his father, Lamek, had given him a name, likely meaning rest or consolation,
because he would, as his father foretold, bring us comfort from our labor and from the painful
toil of our hands because of the ground that Jehovah has cursed. Surely Noah wondered about these
prophecies. How would he bring comfort? How and when would God act against the wicked ones
who surrounded him? For hundreds of years Noah prayed and he wondered. By the time he had lived well
over 500 years, he had married and had a family, three sons. Though he lived in a wicked world,
Noah remained faithful to God and he helped his family to do the same.
Then Jehovah delivered a message that surely must have stunned Noah. Let's continue reading from
Genesis 6, verse 13. After that, God said to Noah,
I have decided to put an end to all flesh because the earth is full of violence on account of them.
So I am bringing them to ruin together with the earth. Make for yourself an ark from
resinous wood. You will make compartments in the ark and cover it with tar inside and outside.
This is how you will make it. The ark should be 300 qubits long, 50 qubits wide, and 30 qubits high.
You will make a window for light for the ark. One qubit from the top. You should put the entrance
of the ark in its side and make it with a lower deck, a second deck, and a third deck.
As for me, I am going to bring flood waters upon the earth to destroy from under the heavens
all flesh that has the breath of life. Everything on the earth will perish.
And I am establishing my covenant with you, and you must go into the ark. You, your sons,
your wife, and your sons' wives with you, and bring into the ark two of every sort of living
creature in order to preserve them alive with you, a male and a female of the flying creatures
according to their kinds, the domestic animals according to their kinds, and all creeping
animals of the ground according to their kinds. Two of each will go in there to you to preserve
them alive. For your part, you are to collect and take with you every kind of food to eat,
to serve as food for you and for the animals. And Noah did according to all that God had commanded
him. He did just so. Noah had long wondered how Jehovah would act against an ungodly world.
Now he knew a catastrophic flood would cleanse the earth.
Noah also knew what he and his family must do. So much dependent on him.
The thought must have been overwhelming. The ark would be gigantic. Now new questions occupied
his mind. Trees. A great many trees would have to be filled in the timber, halls, shaped, and joined.
How would he do that? How would he gather so many kinds of animals? How would he get food supplies
for the animals and for his family? And what about the godless people around him?
What would they think? No one knew what had happened to the righteous men who proceeded him.
Abel had been killed by his brother, King. And Enoch likely was in such danger of being slain by
ungodly ones that God mercifully cut his life short so they wouldn't fall into their hands.
People would see what he was doing. And they'd soon learn why he was doing it.
These god-designing Nephilim influence people might react violently.
Yet Noah trusted in Jehovah and he got to work. He did all of that. God had commanded him.
It took a long time for Noah's family to build the ark. Perhaps some 40 or 50 years.
There must have been challenges, but we never read that Noah complained.
The family had no support from others. Remember that Jesus said that the people took no note
until the flood came and swept them all away. Of course people took note that Noah was building an
ark. His neighbors must have asked him why he was building such an enormous structure.
And Noah explained to them why he was building it. But Noah's contemporaries took no note
that Jehovah was blessing Noah and his construction efforts. They took no note of what this would
mean for them. Instead the people were caught up in everyday affairs,
eating, drinking, and marrying. Those were the things that concerned them.
To those godless people knowing his family were fools, crackpots.
They were the butt of ridicule, jeers, and probably threats. The ark was finally complete.
We can imagine Noah and his family looking at it with pride. And remembering how God had helped him.
Jehovah always directs his servants when needed. Now Jehovah spoke again to Noah.
Let's read chapter 7 starting with verse 1.
After that, Jehovah said to Noah,
Then Noah did everything that Jehovah had commanded him.
The reigns would come. Animals, many animals had to be situated in the ark. Supplies had to be
secured. Noah listened and he obeyed. For the second time in this inspired account,
we are told that Noah did all that he was commanded to do. Now please turn to Genesis chapter 7
and verse 6. Noah was 600 years old when the floodwaters came upon the earth.
So Noah, along with his sons, his wife, and his sons' wives, went into the ark ahead of the floodwaters.
Of every clean animal, and of every animal that is not clean, and of the flying creatures,
and of everything that moves on the ground, they went inside the ark to Noah by
twos, male and female, just as God had commanded Noah. And seven days later, the floodwaters came
upon the earth. In the 600th year of Noah's life, in the second month, on the 17th day of the month,
on that day, all the springs of the vast watery, deep, burst open, and the floodgates of the heavens
were open. And the reign poured down on the earth for forty days and forty nights. On that very day,
Noah went into the ark, along with his sons, Shem, Ham, and Japheth, and his wife, and the
three wives of his sons. They went in with every wild animal according to its kind, and every domestic
animal according to its kind, and every creeping animal of the earth according to its kind, and every
flying creature according to its kind, every bird, every winged creature. They kept going to
Noah inside the ark, two by two, of every sort of flesh that has the breath of life.
So they went in, male and female, of every sort of flesh, just as God had commanded him.
After that, Jehovah shut the door behind him. The flooding continued for forty days on the earth,
and the waters kept increasing and began carrying the ark, and it was floating high above the earth.
The waters became overwhelming, and kept increasing greatly upon the earth,
but the ark floated on the surface of the waters. The waters overwhelmed the earth so greatly
that all the tall mountains under the whole heavens were covered. The waters rose up to
fifteen cubits above the mountains. So all living creatures that were moving on the earth
perished, the flying creatures, the domestic animals, the wild animals, the swarming creatures,
and all mankind. Everything on dry land that had the breath of life in its nostrils died.
So he wiped every living thing from the surface of the earth, including man, animals,
creeping animals, and the flying creatures of the sky. They were all wiped off the earth,
only Noah and those with him in the ark survived. And the waters continued
overwhelming the earth for 150 days. If Noah had wondered how he would collect all those animals,
he now knew. They would come to him. Jehovah would bring them. Noah didn't have to go looking
for them. The animals did come every kind of animal, some by sevens, and some by twos.
Just imagine dozens and dozens of animals strutting, popping, slithering, and waddling into the
earth. We can imagine Noah's family finding places for them all, stroking the soft fur of some
animals as they pass, while avoiding the rough hides or spines of others and making sure to get out
of the way of the large animals as they lumbered past. The birds came too, fluttering,
snoring, what colors, what smells, what sounds. Noah's family must have shouted to hear one
another above the den. When all were inside, Jehovah shut the door.
Can you picture the family huddling together inside the ark, listening, straining to hear,
then it came rain. Perhaps it began almost imperceptibly, but soon it came in torrents.
The sound was deafening. What they had long anticipated was now happening. They were tired,
exhausted, but there was likely little sleep that night. There were animals to check.
There was the din of the rain and how they prayed. Did their thoughts turn to those outside?
Certainly. They knew those people and had preached to them. Many were relatives.
How sad for them. Like Jehovah, Noah took no delight in the death of the wicked.
It saddened him that so many had to die, but he knew that those who perished at ample warning of
what was to come. Even if they hadn't seen the ark Noah was building, they would have heard about
it. They'd know why he was building it. Now it was too late for them. Jehovah had shut the door.
Noah's family listened as the rain battered the ark without letting them.
And then came a moment they would never forget. Movement. They felt their massive
wooden ark lifting from the ground. It was floating. Their hearts were beating loud and fast.
Would their vessel hold together? Let's resume our reading from Genesis chapter 8, verse 1,
to see what happened next. But God gave attention to Noah and to all the wild animals and domestic
animals that were with him in the ark. And God caused a wind to blow over the earth,
and the waters began to subside. The springs of the watery deep and the flood gates of the heavens
were stopped up, so the rain from the heavens stopped falling. Then the waters began to
receive progressively from the earth. By the end of 150 days, the waters had subsided.
In the seventh month, on the 17th day of the month, the ark came to rest on the mountains of
Ararat, and the waters were steadily decreasing until the 10th month. In the 10th month,
on the 1st of the month, the tops of the mountains appeared. So at the end of 40 days,
Noah opened the window that he had made in the ark and sent out a raven. It continued flying
outside and returning until the waters dried off the earth. Later, he sent out a dove to see
whether the waters had receded from the surface of the ground. The dove did not find any resting
place to perch, so it returned to him into the ark, because the waters were still covering the
surface of the whole earth. So he reached his hand out and brought it inside the ark.
He waited seven more days, and once again, he sent out the dove from the ark.
When the dove came to him toward evening, he saw that there was a freshly plucked olive leaf in
its bill, so Noah knew that the waters had receded from the earth. He waited still another seven
days, then he sent out the dove, but it did not return to him any more.
For 40 days and 40 nights, the noise of torrential rain filled the ark, and then it stopped.
Imagine Noah and his family peering out of the ark and seeing nothing but water, no land anywhere.
It went blue, and the waters subsided. Finally, 150 days after the downpour began, the ark settled on land.
What a happy day that must have been. Was it safe to go out? No. The waters had to subside further.
There was plenty to do to keep the family busy. There were animals to feed and to care for them.
Still Noah's family must have longed to be outside, to be free of the confinement,
to feel the ground under their feet. Patience was needed.
Picture the family spending time together, planning what they do when they came out of the ark.
Another 73 days passed. Now they could see the tops of the mountains. Now was it safe to exit?
Noah peered out of a window. He selected from the birds a raven, and he sent it out, but it kept returning.
Noah put the raven back in its place and selected a dove. It too flew and returned, not having found a
place to perch. A week later, he released it again, and it returned with an olive leaf in its bill.
Seven days later, Noah sent it again. This time, it did not return. What next?
Let's continue reading from chapter 8, verse 13.
Now in the 600 first year, in the first month, on the first day of the month, the waters had
drained from the earth, and Noah removed the covering of the ark and saw that the surface of the
ground was drying. In the second month, on the 27th day of the month, the earth had dried off.
God now said to Noah,
Go out of the ark, you, your wife, your sons, and your sons' wives. Bring out with you all the
living creatures of every sort of flesh, of the flying creatures, and of the animals, and of all the
creeping animals of the earth, that they may multiply on the earth and be fruitful and become
many on the earth. So Noah went out, together with his sons, his wife, and his sons' wives.
Every living creature, every creeping animal, and every flying creature,
everything that moves on the earth went out of the ark by families. Then Noah built an alter
to Jehovah, and took some of all the clean animals, and of all the clean flying creatures,
and offered burnt offerings on the altar. And Jehovah began to smell a pleasing aroma,
so Jehovah said in his heart,
Never again will I curse the ground on man's account, for the inclination of the heart of man
is bad, from his youth up, and never again will I strike down every living thing as I have done.
From now on, the earth will never cease to have seeds showing and harvest,
coal and heat, summer and winter and day and night. When the dove didn't return,
Noah removed part of the roof of the ark. Now he could see that much of the land had dried out.
Possibly he could see vegetation growing and flourishing in a way that it hadn't been
possible in the days before the flood when the earth had been cursed.
Still Noah waited for Jehovah's direction.
And then it came. Jehovah's command, go out of the ark, at last,
what a joyful day that must have been. They'd been in the ark for 370 days.
Picture the family coming out of the ark, laughing, breathing fresh air,
eager to adjust to their new life. The annals came out too, and the family watched as they dispersed
in all directions. Some they'd drawn close to, but now it was farewell, a happy farewell.
There were no materialized angels, no Nephilim, and no wicked people. How grateful they were to
Jehovah. Noah wasted no time. He built an altar and sacrificed to Jehovah, and God expressed his
pleasure. Jehovah assured the family that he would never again strike down every living thing.
But he did more than that. He concluded a covenant with Noah and his sons,
and gave them a sign that we too can observe. Let's read about it at Genesis chapter 9, starting
with verse 8. Then God said to Noah, until his sons with him,
I am now establishing my covenant with you, and with your offspring after you, and with every living
creature that is with you, the birds, the animals, and all the living creatures of the earth with you,
all those that came out of the ark, every living creature of the earth. Yes, I establish my covenant
with you. Never again will all flesh be destroyed by the waters of a flood, and never again
will a flood bring the earth to ruin. And God added, this is the sign of the covenant that I am
making between me and you and every living creature that is with you, for all future generations.
I put my rainbow in the cloud, and it will serve as a sign of the covenant between me
and the earth. Whenever I bring a cloud over the earth, then the rainbow will certainly appear in
the cloud, and I will certainly remember my covenant that I made between me and you and every
living creature of every kind, and never again will the waters become a flood to destroy all flesh,
and the rainbow will occur in the cloud, and I will certainly see it, and remember the ever
lasting covenant between God and every living creature of every kind on the earth.
What a magnificent sign Jehovah gave. Every rainbow would remind both God and man of his promise.
How Noah's family must have marveled to see the colors spanning across the sky,
violet, indigo, blue, green, yellow, orange, and red, never again will a flood deluge the earth.
But Jehovah is not one to tolerate wickedness forever.
Let's read what the Apostle Peter wrote. Please turn to second Peter, chapter 2 and verse 5.
The Apostle wrote, and he, God, did not reframe from punishing an ancient world, but kept Noah,
a preacher of righteousness, safe with seven others when he brought a flood upon a world of
ungodly people. Today, we live in a world that resembles the one before the flood.
There's violence, and people do all sorts of things that Jehovah hates.
People are concerned with the everyday affairs of life and take no note of the message of salvation
that we proclaim.
Ridiculars of God's people mockingly say, where is this promise presence of his?
Why all things are continuing exactly as they were from creations beginning?
They are wrong.
Jehovah acted against wickedness in the time of Noah and healed act again.
But like Noah, the faithful will be saved.
God's word assures us.
Jehovah knows how to rescue people of godly devotion out of trial,
but to reserve on righteous people to be destroyed on the day of judgment.
Jehovah will make the earth a paradise, just as he originally purposed.
The paradise will be inhabited by good people.
There will be no people who rebel against God.
And what are the rebellious spirit creatures?
When the flood delus the earth and Noah's day, the rebellious angels left their human bodies
and returned to the spirit realm and disgrace.
However, these demons have continued to exert an evil influence on humans down to this day.
But when Jehovah acts again, the demons and their ruler Satan will be put out of action.
The word of God says this.
By faith, Noah, after receiving divine warning of things not yet seen,
showed godly fear and constructed an ark for the saving of his household.
Faith moved Noah to obey Jehovah.
As a result, he and his family survived the flood.
Noah lived a long life, some 950 years.
When that faithful man has resurrected, he'll have the prospect of living forever.
If we display the faith of Noah and obey Jehovah, we too can walk with Jehovah as our friend
and that friendship can last forever.
The Bible account of Noah reminds us how close we are to the end of this system and
how soon Jehovah will reward our faith.
You will be pleased to know that the dramatic Bible reading that you just enjoyed
is available for download today from JW.org and in the JW Library app.
And just as Jehovah safeguarded Noah and his family in the days before the flood,
he is now safeguarding us.
What can help us stay close to Jehovah despite any trials we face?
In what ways does he come to our aid?
Please pay close attention to brother Kenneth Cook of the governing body as he answers these
questions in the talk. Have faith and do not doubt.
We depend on many powerful man-made things to deliver the items that we need.
For example, a powerful freight train can climb steep hills and deliver its freight on time.
A powerful cargo ship can withstand high seas and deliver its cargo.
But there is a limit to what man's ingenuity can do.
When it comes to our most crucial needs, such as true peace, real security, and lasting happiness,
humans promise what they do not have the power to deliver.
Political, religious, and financial institutions have proved to be untrustworthy.
With so many promises broken, we're not surprised that many people are skeptical about the future.
But in contrast to such failures, Jehovah's promises never fail, and we are made more powerful
when we trust in his promises. He always delivers on his word.
Jehovah promises to sustain us through any trials, no matter how intense they may become.
Consider Jesus example. No human has faced trials more intense than what he experienced,
yet Jesus had faith that delivered, powerful faith that carried him through.
With freeness of speech, Jesus encouraged his followers to have faith and not to doubt.
For example, on one occasion while traveling near Bethany with his disciples,
Jesus used a fig tree to provide an object lesson on the need to have faith in God.
The account in Matthew chapter 21 tells us that the fig tree was barren, except for leaves.
In verses 19 and 20, Jesus said to the tree,
let no fruit come from you ever again, and the fig tree withered instantly.
Now as a result, the disciples were amazed, and they asked Jesus,
how is it that the fig tree withered instantly?
As we read Jesus reply to them in verses 21 and 22,
please keep in mind that Jesus is providing an object lesson for them.
So let's pull out the lesson about faith as we read verses 21 and 22.
And answer Jesus said to them,
truly I say to you, if you have faith and do not doubt, not only will you do what I did to the
fig tree, but even if you say to this mountain, be lifted up and thrown into the sea,
it will happen. And all the things you ask in prayer, having faith, you will receive.
That was a powerful object lesson on faith, especially in view of the trials that his disciples
would soon experience. But do you see any more object lessons in this example?
There's another connection between what happened to the fig tree and having faith.
You see, the nation of Israel like that fig tree had a deceptive appearance.
Although the nation was in a covenant relationship with God, it proved to be without faith,
and it was barren of good fruitage. It even rejected God's own son.
So by causing the unproductive fig tree to wither, Jesus demonstrated what the end result would be
for those without faith. To benefit from this object lesson today, we also need to have faith
and not doubt. In this talk, we will discuss four situations that show how prayer, study,
and meditation can help us to rely fully on Jehovah's promises.
With each situation, we will look at the challenge we face, the promise we've received,
and our reason for faith in that promise. Here's the first situation. It is
when we are tempted. What is the challenge? The challenge is to avoid giving into temptation.
There are many things that can tempt us to go down a wrong path and show a lack of faith.
We could be tempted by immoral desires that violate God's laws and principles.
We could be tempted to set spiritual interests aside and pursue material things.
We could be tempted to become prideful and ambitiously try to outdo others.
We must never allow that to happen. The fact is that there are many things that could tempt us
to show a lack of faith and of trust in Jehovah. So now there's the challenge. Here is the promise.
Let's see Jehovah's promise in his word. It is twofold or two-part, and we find it at 1 Corinthians
chapter 10 and in verse 13. As we read it, look for the promise, verse 13.
No temptation has come upon you except what is common to men, but God is faithful,
and he will not let you be tempted beyond what you can bear. But along with the temptation,
he will also make the way out so that you may be able to endure it.
What is the promise here? First, Jehovah will not let us be tempted beyond what we can bear
or handle. Also, Jehovah will help us. He will make the way out for us, it said,
that is out of any temptation if we rely on him. We must have faith and not doubt.
So far, we've considered the challenge and the promise. Now let's examine our reason for faith
in that promise. Our reason for faith is this. Jehovah knows us better than we know ourselves,
and his word says that we can remain faithful. In Deuteronomy 30 and verse 11,
Jehovah told the Israelites that what he required of them was not too difficult,
nor was it beyond their reach, he said. So for good reason, he expected them to show faith
and to obey. He expects no less of his servants today. Let's consider some practical steps that
will help us to resist temptations. We will list them first, and then we will look more closely
at two of the steps. First, pray regularly for the needed strength. Second, study and meditate,
so as to keep your mind fixed on Jehovah's promises. Third, know your weaknesses,
and fourth, avoid situations that would increase temptation. Now let's look more closely at steps
three and four. That is the need to know our weaknesses and how to avoid situations that cause
temptation for us. We're going to begin with a chain. It's a fact that a chain is only as strong
as its weakest link. True, where it is weak is where it will break first. Like a chain, we have
weaknesses that others may not see, but we should know our weaknesses. Make certain that you know
yourself and that you know where you are most vulnerable. When we know our weaknesses, we know what
to guard against. In other words, we know where the weak link is. When we know our weaknesses,
then we are able to stand firm in the faith. One sister said, when I face temptation,
I reject it immediately. Letting the mind dwell on the possibilities is what gets you into trouble
in the first place. So again, know your weaknesses and guard against those weaknesses.
Another important step that we listed is to avoid situations that increase temptation.
Stay away from people whose speech and conduct make wrongdoing look attractive.
Remove yourself from situations where you know you're going to face temptations.
Surround yourself with friends who encourage you to do what is right.
Proverbs 22 and verse 3 says, that the shrewd one sees the danger and conceals himself,
but the inexperienced keep right on going and suffer the consequences. We prove to be shrewd when
we trust that inspired statement and avoid temptation. So in review, when we are tempted,
we looked at the challenge, the promise, and our reason for faith in that promise. Then we considered
what will help us to succeed, which included the need to pray regularly and to study and meditate
on God's Word. With each of the next three situations we will follow the same pattern.
The next situation in which we must rely on Jehovah's promise has to do with when we face opposition.
Here's the challenge. Avoid compromising under pressure. No doubt all of us think at times about how
we would handle various problems that may eventually confront us. Such mental exercises can be
helpful, provided that we remember that Jehovah will always be with us when we are doing his will,
which brings us to his promise. Jehovah will give us his Holy Spirit so that we can endure opposition.
Jesus is one who trusted in that promise. He also urged his followers to remain calm and show trust.
Consider what he said at Luke 12, 11 and 12. Now, as we read Jesus' words,
have in mind that the scribes and the Pharisees were putting extreme pressure on him with many
questions in an effort to use Jesus' words against him. Of course, they failed. And Jesus here
gives assurance that like him, we too will succeed when persecution comes if we have faith and do not
doubt. At Luke 12, 11 and 12, Jesus said, when they bring you in before public assemblies,
government officials and authorities, do not become anxious about how or what you will speak in
defense or what you will say. For the Holy Spirit will teach you in that very hour the things you
should say. How can we receive the benefits of this promise when opposition comes?
By listening carefully to Jesus' words there, do not become anxious, Jesus said,
remain calm. For the Holy Spirit will teach you, show trust.
Jesus is the greatest example of one who lived by those very words, and we can too, but it takes faith.
So again, we've looked at the challenge and the promise. Now, let's examine our reason for faith
in that promise. And it is this, Jehovah is more powerful, infinitely more powerful than any
opposer. Here are three things all centered on Jehovah that will help us to face persecution and
opposition. First, pray regularly, and when doing so, express your fears to Jehovah and ask for
the peace of God. In the book of Lamentations, the inspired writer urged God's people to pour out their
heart like water. Water can flow quickly, and like water flowing out of a large bucket, we should
not hold back when praying to our Heavenly Father, especially whenever we are faced with opposition
and persecution, pour out your heart to Him, and Jehovah promises that He will help you.
We must have faith in Jehovah's power to help us and trust in that promise. As Jesus said,
do not become anxious. Strong faith will help us to avoid such anxiety.
Second, we are also help the face opposition when we study and meditate on God's word.
Daily Bible reading helps to strengthen our conviction that Jehovah loves us and that He will
never abandon us. Focus on His tender qualities as you read His words. A feel, Jehovah's love for
you in the things that He says and does. As you meditate on the words and works of Jehovah,
reflect on your own experience in His service. You'll likely be able to list many things that
our Heavenly Father has done for you since you started to serve Him. Yes, Bible reading and meditation
draw us closer to Jehovah our source of strength. And the more your confidence in Him grows,
the stronger your bond with Him will become, and the stronger your faith in Him will become.
Now related to what we just mentioned, a third thing that will help you when opposition comes
is to reflect on how Jehovah has helped you through trials in the past. And that is exactly
what David did. At Psalm 18 and verse 6, he said, in my distress, I called to Jehovah to my God,
I kept crying for help. From His temple, He heard my voice and my cry for help reached His ears.
So, did David recall Jehovah's help? Yes, he did. He heard my voice, David said, and my cry for help
reached His ears. David not only remembered what had happened, he had faith that Jehovah heard Him.
David was still putting that blessing to work because he never forgot all that Jehovah had done for
Him. When you know that Jehovah has helped you, when you just know it, never forget it.
We show gratitude when we remember and such experiences strengthen us to face the trials yet ahead
of us. Now so far we've considered the need for faith when we are tempted and when we face opposition.
Now we will again follow the same pattern with the third situation when we are afflicted with illness.
What is the challenge? The challenge we face when we are seriously ill is to avoid questioning
whether Jehovah will care for us. We must continue to remind ourselves that Jehovah loves us and
that He will never abandon us. Remember the promise. Jehovah will sustain His loyal ones who are sick.
And that promise is not just a general feeling that you get from reading His Word.
That promise is a clear statement found in Psalm 41 and verse 3. We invite you to read it. Psalm 41
and verse 3. But is it a promise to cure us? Notice what it says.
Jehovah will sustain Him on His sick bed. During His sickness you will completely change His bed.
Did Jehovah use the word cure here? No, He said sustain. Jehovah will sustain us. The cure will come
later. But His promise to sustain His servants is a promise that we can trust. Here is our reason
for faith in that promise. We know that Jehovah has compassion for those who are disadvantaged by
poor health among other things. In verse 1 of that same Psalm we are assured that Jehovah will
rescue the lowly one. Jehovah makes a similar loving expression at Isaiah 57 and verse 15. There he
says, I reside in the high and lofty place but also with those crushed and lowly in spirit to revive
the spirit of the lowly one and to revive the heart of those being crushed. I reside in the holy
place he said, yet also with those crushed and lowly in spirit. Jehovah cares deeply for us,
doesn't he? In his compassion he draws close to his faithful ones who are ill. But while we should
have faith that Jehovah will sustain us and that is true, of course, whenever we face serious illness,
what steps must we take to cope? Here are three things that we can do to work along with
Jehovah's loving support. First, pray regularly for practical wisdom to deal with your illness.
James 1 and verse 6 says, keep asking in faith not doubting at all. Earlier Jesus said, have faith
and do not doubt. One sister with strong faith saw the need to do her part when she found out that
she was seriously ill. She said, when I learned that I had cancer in my lung and colon,
I thought that I had just received a death sentence. But after I got home from the doctor,
I thought, okay, it's not what I expected, but I have to find a way to deal with this. So what did
she do? She prayed and not just any prayer. She says, I never pray, make me better. I always pray,
help me be strong and endure my illness. Beautiful example. That sister understands Psalm 41 and
verse 3, doesn't she? If we do not recover from an illness, we have faith that the cure is coming in
God's new world. In the meantime, we also have faith in Jehovah's promise that he will sustain us
through any trial, any illness. He will change our bed as the verse said, meaning that Jehovah will
see to it that our sick bed will not be one of hopelessness. Rather, we will endure with faith and
hope. Many have found that their greatest comfort comes from heartfelt prayer and from reading
such comforting passages in God's word. When we do this, Jehovah will give us strength and he
will bring comforting thoughts to our mind. That brings us to the second thing that we can do
to work along with Jehovah's promise and his loving support and it is this, study and meditate
on Jehovah's promises in order to strengthen your conviction in the new world where you all have
perfect health. That time is coming. As Isaiah 33, verse 24 foretells, no resident will say,
I am sick. But we can meditate on such wonderful promises only if we take the time to read them.
So take time to read a portion of God's word every day. Give close attention to the Psalms
and to what Jesus did during his earthly ministry. Such accounts provide real life examples not
only of coping, but also of godly compassion for those who are ill. And we also have such real
life examples of compassion among us today. So the third thing that those who are afflicted with
illness can do is benefit from association with fellow believers to the extent possible.
We've come to appreciate this even more after living through a pandemic, isn't that true?
One sister who has coped with serious illness says this, do not isolate yourself,
allow friends to help you. There may be times when you feel alone, but don't isolate yourself.
That's wise advice and it is scriptural advice. Always remember that the love we see among
Jehovah's people is just a reflection of how he feels about us. After all, he gave us the ability
to love others and his people show that God-like love for one another every day. So put your faith
in Jehovah's sustaining power. Put your faith in the comfort from the Scriptures as well as
the loving support of family and friends. Put your faith in Jehovah's sure promises and hold on
to the assurance that life is worth living even when you are afflicted with a serious illness.
In all that we have considered about Jehovah's promises, we see that faith is the essential quality
that we need to have. We need faith when we are tempted, faith when we face opposition and faith
when we are afflicted with serious illness. We also need faith when we face economic hardship.
After all, we must have certain things to survive day to day and to continue on
in our service to Jehovah. The question is, how well do we cope when getting the necessities
of life becomes difficult for us? Food, clothing, shelter, transportation, and so forth?
You see, when these things become hard to get, it can cause anxiety. That's a fact. It can.
And avoiding such anxiety is a challenge we may face. If we ever face that challenge,
what must we call to our mind? Jehovah's promise. Jehovah promises that if we put the kingdom
first, he will provide the things that we need. We must have faith in that promise, strong faith
in that promise. It's a promise that Jesus made very clear for us. God's Son understood that in
this system of things, economic hardship would sometimes befall God's people. And He made it
a point to include some comments about this challenge in His well-known sermon on the mount.
But along with the challenge, He provided Jehovah's promise. Please follow along as we read Matthew
chapter 6 and verse 33. Matthew 633. Jesus lived as a human. And here's a point we want to keep in mind
as we get ready to read this verse. He grew up in a hardworking family. It may be that acquiring
the necessities of life did not always come easy for them. But they trusted in Jehovah,
and they had what they needed to serve Him. So what Jesus later said here, in Matthew 633,
he said as a real person, a human who knew what people faced at times. So with that context,
he had just urged his listeners to stop being anxious and to trust in Jehovah's ability to help
them. And then he gave the promise in verse 33. Keep on then, he said, seeking first the kingdom
and his righteousness. And all these other things will be added to you. The conviction in that
statement will be added stems from the certainty of the promise. Jehovah cannot lie, and His Son
does not lie. If we put the interest of the kingdom first, we'll experience the blessings that come
from that promise. We have many reasons to have faith in those words. Consider, Jehovah provides
daily for the needs of plants and of birds. So how much more so for His faithful servants? We know
that this is true not only because the Scriptures tell us so, but also because we see it for ourselves.
At Matthew 626-29, just before urging His disciples to put the kingdom first,
Jesus invited them to observe intently the birds of heaven. Now why? What did He want His disciples
to see? He wanted them to see how our Heavenly Father cares for those little creatures,
how He looks after them and sees that they have their daily food. They have what they need.
Birds do not spend their days feeling anxious and neither should we. Jesus rhetorically asked,
are you not worth more than they are? Such lessons remind us that we should trust Jehovah's promise
and in His ability and desire to keep it. We learn from Jesus' sermon on the Mount that real
happiness and security do not depend on material things. What matters is our friendship with our
Heavenly Father. So there are the lessons, but in practical terms, how can you avoid anxiety
over economic hardship? Remember to pray continually. When anxiety takes hold of a person here,
she might overlook things that they normally would never overlook. Keep praying and have faith
in Jehovah's promise. He listens to our prayers and pray just as Jesus taught us, not for financial
security, but for our daily needs, our bread for this day, as He said. And along with prayer,
remember to study and meditate on God's word each day. This too can be overlooked when one feels
overwhelmed. Don't let that happen to you. Jehovah will see your effort and He will bless you for
relying on Him. Study and meditate in order to strengthen your conviction that Jehovah will take
care of you. He promises to do so. In all of this, don't forget your past blessings. Just as Jehovah
sustained his people in the past, reflect on how Jehovah has helped you. He has not changed.
Use that experience to build up your faith and your conviction that Jehovah will go on helping you
through difficult times. We live in a largely faithless and skeptical world, isn't that true?
We need faith. And when we have it, we must keep it strong. When we have faith in Jehovah's promises
and do not doubt, we are helped to face whatever may come our way. We are helped when we are tempted,
when we face opposition, when we are afflicted with illness, and when we experience economic hardship.
In these critical last days, all of us, each one of us, needs to keep growing in faith,
cultivate the yearning that Jesus apostles had toward growing in faith. We can see their
desire in what they said to Jesus in Luke chapter 17 and in verse 5. Luke 17, 5, please go to
that verse. And we will also read Jesus reply to them in verse 6. After hearing Jesus warn about
those who caused stumbling, we read starting in verse 5 that the apostles said to the Lord,
give us more faith than the Lord said, if you had faith the size of a mustard grain,
you would say to this black mulberry tree, be uprooted and planted in the sea, and it would obey you.
In other words, have faith and do not doubt, he was telling them. Now, it is extremely unlikely
that you will ever need to command a black mulberry tree to uproot itself and be planted in the sea.
So then what was Jesus' point? It is this, we are powerful by faith. Challenges that may seem equally
impossible have been overcome or defeated by our faith in God's power. Faith helps us to conquer
any temptation that we face. Faith helps us to defeat any opposition that rises up against us.
Faith sustains us through any illness we may experience and faith strengthens us to trust in
Jehovah's promise to support us during economic hardship. In other words, uproot the mulberry tree
and plant it in the sea. As we considered in each of those situations, we reviewed how prayer,
study, and meditation will help us to stay close to Jehovah, the one who will grant us more faith.
Pray for each day. Inmitate examples of faith found in God's word as well as those serving along
with us today. Remain focused on Jehovah who fulfills all of his promises and he will bless your
efforts to have faith and not to doubt. Thank you, Brother Cook, for that warm assurance that
Jehovah will always do what he has promised. To conclude this session, we invite you to sing a song
that expresses our need for Jehovah's help and our reliance on him. Its song number 118 entitled,
Give us more faith, after which you may have the closing prayer at your individual locations.
Again, that song number 118.